README.md, before:

# Authorship of the Federalist Papers

*Author: Toby Surtees*

## Problem Description

### What are The Federalist Papers?

The Federalist Papers are a collection of 85 essays written by Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay under the pseudonym '*Publius*' in 1787-88. The aim of these articles was to persuade New Yorkers to support ratification of the US Constitution.

Examples of ideas in The Federalist Papers include opposition to the Bill of Rights (Federalist No. 84) over dangers of limiting the rights that people had to those only appearing in the bill, giving the govenment power to infringe on rights not listed, as well as topics on foerign influence, interstate conflict, power and taxation and most extensively the US Constitution and Power of Congress and structure of the new federal government.

### Disputed Authorship

At the time of publication, the authors of the Federalist Papers attempted to hide their identities by using the collective pseudonym '*Publius*', leading to conflicting ideas of who wrote each essay. Today, researchers generally agree on the authors of the essays; however, the remaining 12 remain disputed between Hamilton and Madison.

The modern consensus is as follows:

- **Hamilton**: 51 Articles numbering 1, 6-9, 11-13, 15-17, 21-36, 59-61, 65-85.
- **Madison**: 29 Articles numbering 10, 14, 18-20, 37-58, 62-63.
- **Jay**: 5 Articles numbering 2-5, 64.

The disputed 12 articles are around the authorship of articles 49-58 (*Madison*), 18-20 (*Madison and Hamilton*) and 64 (*Jay*), with conflicting claims from Hamilton, claiming 63 essays including 3 joint with Madison, while Madison claims 29 essays for himself citing rushed clerical work after the death of Hamilton in 1804.

Most modern research strongly favours Madison's claim of authorship over that of Hamilton, but the debate is not considered fully closed.

## Project Aims

The aim of this project is to contribute to the research around the federalist papers by using Linguistics and Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods to attempt to decern who of the three authors is most likely to have written the 12 disputed papers.  

At the stage of writing, this will mostly consist of comparison and statistical analysis of the text by looking at other works of the authors and comparing writing style and commmonalities between each work, as well as other confirmed articles in the same paper.

## Existing Research

Collins, J. et al. (2004) ‘Detecting Collaborations in Text Comparing the Authors’ Rhetorical Language Choices in The Federalist Papers’, Computers and the Humanities, 38(1), pp. 15–36. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CHUM.0000009291.06947.52>.

Fung, G. (2003) ‘The disputed federalist papers: SVM feature selection via concave minimization’, in Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Diversity in computing. TAPIA03: Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing Conference, Atlanta Georgia USA: ACM, pp. 42–46. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1145/948542.948551>.

Jeong, S.W. and Ročková, V. (2025) ‘From Small to Large Language Models: Revisiting the Federalist Papers’. arXiv. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.01869>.

Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D.L. (2012) Applied Bayesian and Classical Inference: The Case of The Federalist Papers. Springer Science & Business Media.

Savoy, J. (2013) ‘The Federalist Papers revisited: A collaborative attribution scheme’, Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 50(1), pp. 1–8. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1002/meet.14505001036>.

## Credits

All credit for 'The Federalist Papers' resource used in this project goes to <https://www.gutenberg.org/>, where the documents are available to download for free.

Commit message:

Update README, add proposed methodology section

README.md, after:

# Authorship of the Federalist Papers

*Author: Toby Surtees*

## Problem Description

### What are The Federalist Papers?

The Federalist Papers are a collection of 85 essays written by Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay under the pseudonym '*Publius*' in 1787-88. The aim of these articles was to persuade New Yorkers to support ratification of the US Constitution.

Examples of ideas in The Federalist Papers include opposition to the Bill of Rights (Federalist No. 84) over dangers of limiting the rights that people had to those only appearing in the bill, giving the govenment power to infringe on rights not listed, as well as topics on foerign influence, interstate conflict, power and taxation and most extensively the US Constitution and Power of Congress and structure of the new federal government.

### Disputed Authorship

At the time of publication, the authors of the Federalist Papers attempted to hide their identities by using the collective pseudonym '*Publius*', leading to conflicting ideas of who wrote each essay. Today, researchers generally agree on the authors of the essays; however, the remaining 12 remain disputed between Hamilton and Madison.

The modern consensus is as follows:

- **Hamilton**: 51 Articles numbering 1, 6-9, 11-13, 15-17, 21-36, 59-61, 65-85.
- **Madison**: 29 Articles numbering 10, 14, 18-20, 37-58, 62-63.
- **Jay**: 5 Articles numbering 2-5, 64.

The disputed 12 articles are around the authorship of articles 49-58 (*Madison*), 18-20 (*Madison and Hamilton*) and 64 (*Jay*), with conflicting claims from Hamilton, claiming 63 essays including 3 joint with Madison, while Madison claims 29 essays for himself citing rushed clerical work after the death of Hamilton in 1804.

Most modern research strongly favours Madison's claim of authorship over that of Hamilton, but the debate is not considered fully closed.

## Project Aims

The aim of this project is to contribute to the research around the federalist papers by using Linguistics and Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods to attempt to decern who of the three authors is most likely to have written the 12 disputed papers.  

At the stage of writing, this will mostly consist of comparison and statistical analysis of the text by looking at other works of the authors and comparing writing style and commmonalities between each work, as well as other confirmed articles in the same paper.

## Proposed Methodology

1. LLM or Bayesian Models - Research into this specific case has shown no significant performance improvement of using Large Language Models (LLMs) against more traditional Bayesian or Topical Models (3), suggesting the best route for this project is a more typical Bayesian approach.
2. Feature Selection - In tasks like this one, where writing style is the main differentiator between authors, feature selection is critical in producing useful results. Previous approaches have included using only function words (3,4), less affected by subject matter and thus better for attributing authorship. Specifically, Topic Embeddings of Function Words have been shown to give the best attribution performance (3).
3. Stylistic Signals - Looking beyond word frequency into stylistic signals such as rhetoric and discourse structure can help in article attribution (1), a potential path for exploring beyond statistical analysis.
4. Types of Classification - Using multiple types of classification and combining the results can increase the robustness of results (5), so I should explore using more than one classification technique.

## References

[1]Collins, J. et al. (2004) ‘Detecting Collaborations in Text Comparing the Authors’ Rhetorical Language Choices in The Federalist Papers’, Computers and the Humanities, 38(1), pp. 15–36. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1023/B:CHUM.0000009291.06947.52>.

[2]Fung, G. (2003) ‘The disputed federalist papers: SVM feature selection via concave minimization’, in Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Diversity in computing. TAPIA03: Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing Conference, Atlanta Georgia USA: ACM, pp. 42–46. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1145/948542.948551>.

[3]Jeong, S.W. and Ročková, V. (2025) ‘From Small to Large Language Models: Revisiting the Federalist Papers’. arXiv. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.01869>.

[4]Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D.L. (2012, 1984) Applied Bayesian and Classical Inference: The Case of The Federalist Papers. Springer Science & Business Media.

[5]Savoy, J. (2013) ‘The Federalist Papers revisited: A collaborative attribution scheme’, Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 50(1), pp. 1–8. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1002/meet.14505001036>.

## Credits

All credit for 'The Federalist Papers' resource used in this project goes to <https://www.gutenberg.org/>, where the documents are available to download for free.
